The
next morning we fell early to work for the transportation of this great mass of gold
near a mile by land to the beach, and thence three miles by boat to the Hispaniola, was
a considerable task for so small a number of workmen. The three fellows still abroad
upon the island did not greatly trouble us. A single sentry on the shoulder of the hill
was sufficient to insure us against any sudden onslaught, and we thought, besides, they had
had more than enough of fighting. Therefore the work was pushed on briskly. Gray and Ben
Gunn came and went with the boat, while the rest, during their absences, piled treasures
on the beach. Two of the bars, slung in a rope-sand, made a good load for a grown man,
one that he was glad to walk slowly with. For my part, as I was not much use at carrying,
I was kept busy all day in the cave, packing the minted money into bread-bags. It was a
strange collection, like Billy Bone's hoard for the diversity of the coinage, but so much
larger and so much more varied that I think I never had more pleasure than in sorting
them. English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Georges and Luises, doubloons and double guineas,
and Morderes and sequins, the pictures of all the kings of Europe for the last hundred
years, strange oriental pieces stamped with what looked like wisps of string or bits of
spider's web, round pieces, square pieces, and pieces bored through the middle, as if
neck. Nearly every variety of money in the world must, I think, have found a place in
that collection, and for number I am sure they were like autumn leaves, so that my back
ached with stooping and my fingers with sorting them out. Day after day this work went on.
By every evening a fortune had been stowed aboard, but there was another fortune waiting
for the morrow, and all this time we heard nothing of the three surviving mutineers.
At last, I think it was on the third night, the doctor and I were strolling on the shoulder
of the hill where it overlooks the lowlands of the isle, when from out of the thick darkness
below, the wind brought us a noise between shrieking and singing. It was only a snatch
that reached our ears, followed by the former silence.
Heaven forgive them, said the doctor, tis the mutineers.
All drunk, sir, struck in the voice of silver from behind us.
Silver, I should say, was allowed his entire liberty, and in spite of daily rebuffs, seemed
to regard himself once more as quite a privileged and friendly dependent. Indeed it was remarkable
how well he bore these slights, and with what unwearying politeness he kept on trying to
ingratiate himself with all. Yet I think none treated him better than a dog unless
it was Ben Gunn, who was still terribly afraid of his old quartermaster, or myself, who had
really something to thank him for. Although for that matter, I suppose, I had reason to
think even worse of him than anyone else, for I had seen him meditating a fresh treachery
upon the plateau. Accordingly, it was pretty gruffly that the doctor answered him.
Drunk or raving, said he.
Right you were, sir, replied Silver, and precious little odds which to you and me.
I suppose you would hardly ask me to call you a humane man, returned the doctor with
a sneer, and so my feelings may surprise you, Master Silver. But if I were sure they were
raving, as I am mortally certain one at least of them is down with fever, I should leave
this camp, and at whatever risk to my own carcass take them the assistance of my skill.
Ask your pardon, sir, you would be very wrong, quote Silver. You would lose your precious
life and you may lay to that. I am on your side now, hand in glove, and I shouldn't wish
for to see the party weakened, let alone yourself, seeing as I know what I owes you. But these
men down there, they couldn't keep their word, no, not supposing they wished to, and what's
more, they couldn't believe as you could.
No, said the doctor, you're the man to keep their word, we know that.
Well, that was about the last news we had of the three pirates. Only once we heard a
gunshot a great way off, and supposed them to be hunting. A council was held and it was
decided that we must desert them on the island, to the huge glee, I must say, of Ben Gunn
and with the strong approval of Gray. We left a good stock of powder and shot, the bulk
of the salt-coat, a few medicines and some other necessaries, tools, clothing, a spare
sail, a fathom or two of rope, and by the particular desire of the doctor, a handsome
president of tobacco. That was about our last doing on the island. Before that, we
had got the treasure stowed and had shipped enough water and the remainder of the goat
meat in case of any distress. And at last, one fine morning, we weighed anchor, which
was about all that we could manage, and stood out of North Inlet, the same colors flying
that the captain had flown and fought under at the palisade. The three fellows must have
been watching us closer than we thought for, as we soon had proved, for coming through
the narrows, we had to lie very near the southern point, and there we saw all three of them,
kneeling together on a spit of sand with their arms raised in supplication. It went to all
our hearts, I think, to leave them in that wretched state, but we could not risk another
mutiny, and to take them home for the gibbet would have been a cruel sort of kindness.
The doctor hailed them and told them of the stores we had left, and where they were to
find them, but they continued to call us by name and appeal to us, for God's sake, to
be merciful and not leave them to die in such a place. At last, seeing the ship still bore
on her course, and was now swiftly drawing out of earshot, one of them, I know not which
it was, leaped to his feet with a hoarse cry, whipped his musket to his shoulder, and sent
a shot whistling over Silver's head and through the mainsail. After that we kept under cover
of the bulwarks, and when next I looked out they had disappeared from the spit, and the
spit itself had almost melted out of sight in the growing distance. That was at least
the end of that. And before noon, to my inexpressible joy, the highest rock of Treasure Island had
sunk into the blue round of sea. We were so short of men that everyone on board had
to bear a hand, only the captain lying on a mattress in the stern and giving his orders,
for though greatly recovered he was still in want of quiet. We laid her head for the
nearest port in Spanish America, for we could not risk the voyage home without fresh hands,
and as it was, what with the baffling winds and a couple of fresh gales, we were all worn
out before we reached it. It was just at sundown when we cast anchor in a most beautiful landlocked
gulf, and were immediately surrounded by shore boats full of Negroes and Mexican Indians
and half-bloods selling fruits and vegetables and offering to dive for bits of money. The
sight of so many good-humored faces, especially the blacks, the taste of the tropical fruits,
and above all the lights that began to shine in the town made a most charming contrast
to our dark and bloody sojourn on the island, and the doctor and the squire, taking me along
with him, went ashore to pass the early part of the night. Here they met the captain of
an Englishman of war, fell in talk with him, went on board his ship, and in short had so
agreeable a time that day was breaking when we came alongside the Hispaniola.
Ben Gunn was on the deck alone, and as soon as we came on board he began, with wonderful
contortions, to make us a confession. Silver was gone. The maroon had connived at his escape
in a shore boat some hours ago, and he now assured us that he had only done so to preserve
their lives, which would certainly have been forfeit if that man with the one leg that
stayed aboard. But this was not all. The sea cook had not gone empty-handed. He had cut
through a bulkhead unobserved and had removed one of the sacks of coin, worth perhaps three
or four hundred guineas, to help him on his further wanderings. I think we were all pleased
to be so cheaply quit of him.
Well, to make a long story short, we got a few hands on board, made a good cruise home,
when the Hispaniola reached Bristol just as Mr. Blandly was beginning to think of fitting
out her consort. Five men, only of those who had sailed, returned with her. Drink, and
the devil has done for the rest, with a vengeance, although to be sure, we were not quite in
so bad a case as that other ship they sang about. With one man of her crew alive, what
put to sea with seventy-five. All of us had an ample share of the treasure and used it
wisely or foolishly, according to our natures. Captain Smollett is now retired from the sea.
Gray not only saved his money, but being suddenly smit with the desire to rise, also studied
his profession, and he is now mate and part owner of a fine, full-rigged ship, married
besides, and the father of a family. As for Ben Gunn, he got a thousand pounds, which
he spent or lost in three weeks, or, to be more exact, in nineteen days, for he was back
begging on the twentieth. Then he was given a lodge to keep, exactly as he had feared
upon the island. But he still lives, a great favorite, though something of a butt, with
the country boys, and a notable singer in church on Sundays and Saints' days. Of silver
we have heard no more. That formidable seafaring man with one leg has at last gone clean out
of my life, and I dare say he met his old Negress, and perhaps still lives in comfort
with her and Captain Flint. It is to be hoped so, I suppose, for his chance of comfort in
another world are very small. The bar silver and the arms still lie, for all that I know,
where Flint buried them, and certainly they shall lie there for me. Oxen and wane ropes
would not bring me back again to that accursed island, and the worst dreams that ever I have
are when I hear the surf booming about its coasts, or start upright in bed with the sharp
voice of Captain Flint still ringing in my ears, Pieces of Eight! Pieces of Eight!
End of chapter thirty-four, and End of Treasure Island, by Robert Louis Stevenson.